---
layout: post
title: Analysis Of The UCI Iris Dataset
cover-img: /assets/img/iris.jpg
subtitle: by Chandler Reyes
---

## The Data
### Longest Petal (in cm) On Average
Out of all of the iris petals observed in the dataset, the iris   
with the longest petal on average turned out to be the iris virginica  
with an average length of 5.552 cm. The second longest petal was  
the iris versicolor with a length of 4.26. This leaves the shortest  
petal to be iris setosa with an average length of 1.464 cm.

### Widest Sepal (in cm) On Average
There were three different types of iris sepals that were measured  
in the datatset. The iris with the widest sepal was the iris setosa with  
an average width of 3.41 cm. The second widest sepal was the iris virginica  
with a width of 2.97. The iris with the least wide sepal was the iris versicolor  
coming in at a width of 2.77 cm.

## The Process and Everything That Went Wrong

### The Beginning
Going into this lab, I didn't expect it to be as tough  
as it was. The difficulty, however, didnt come from the task  
itself that was assigned, but from the out of the box thinking  
that had to be done. 

### The Coding Process
The starting point for me was to begin with the simplest way to do  
whats is being asked. I started making 3 lists and making a dictionary  
with the three different iris names as the keys and the different lists  
as the values. It looked a bit like this:  

```javascript
list1 = []
list2 = []
list3 = []

flower = {"Iris-setosa" : list1, "Iris-versicolor" : list2, "Iris-virginica" : []}
```

Using this setup and the code block below, I was able to create the dictionary  
with the lists attached to the different flower types. 
```javascript
with open('iris.csv', 'r') as f:
    data = csv.reader(f)
    next(data)
    for row in data:
       flower[row[4]].append(row[3])
```

This method, however, was not very accessible as it only worked  
for this specific data set. So I had to figure out a way to change my code so it  
work with any data set that is input. This is where I decided to branch out to  
Mr. Lee for help. When meeting with him, he helped me realize that the main  
task at hand was that I just needed to make a key and value every time the  
for loop hit a new iris name. I also managed to bounce some ideas around with Justin  
and managed to end with something that looks like this:  
```javascript
//or every row, row being a placeholder for all the different lists, in the csv file
    for row in data:
        //if the flower name is not already a key, create a key and a list the is the value for that key
        if row[4] not in petal_length: 
            petal_length[row[4]] = []

            //Insert the value in the given row into the list created
            petal_length[row[4]].append(float(row[2]))

        else:

            petal_length[row[4]].append(float(row[2]))
```
That chunk of code can be used with another dataset and you would only have to  
change very few aspects of it. The process to get to this took a few days which  
did cause me to lose some hope at a point in time because I got very  
hard stuck on creating a dictionary with multiple values for one key  
without realizing that the whole time, I could have just been using a  
list of values as my single value. Besides the mental block that hit me initially,  
I can say that this project was quite an enjoyable experience.